His name is Dale Dougherty.
In 2005, he got this feeling.
He was a Scientist.
An Engineer.
A Maker.
A Creator.
He had this pretty unnerving feeling..
The West, particularly America, was becoming
a consumer nation.
All manufacturing was being done by factories
in China.
All fabrication came from there.
We are deteriorating into consumers.
Creation is no longer a popular activity.
That was the feeling he had.
So, he came up with a Manifesto.
Started a magazine, started clubs.
It ran, for almost ten years, it ran.
Ran out of funds unfortunately, but, look
at the Manifesto, and look at the words there.
Make, Share, Give, Learn, Tool Up, Play, Participate,
Support, Change!
It is not enough if you create and build.
You need to share it!
Teach others.
Learn from others.
Support everybody.
It was a really beautiful vision statement.
What do you say?
Dale Dougherty!
Namaste!
412!
It is about Building and Making.
Particularly, when I saw the cover of this
book, I thought it would be about the Builder
/ Maker Movement started by Dale Dougherty.
It was called “Build”.
The author claimed it was an unorthodox guide
to making things worth making.
Tony Fadell — we have met him before too.
He used to work at Apple during the eras of
the iPod Design and the iPhone Design.
He is the brain behind the Nest thermostat.
Before jumping in and looking at the book,
… he calls it “Unorthodox” — but what’s
his claim to fame?
You can’t just like that trust a stranger
nobody just because he has a shaved head,
yes?!
So, who is he?
When I googled a little about him, I learned
that he has 300 patents to his credit.
And, in the last seven/eight years, he has
been marked as one of the Top 100 Most Influential
People in the world.
And, more recently, the list of the Top 50
most creative, most influential, most famous
gadgets of all time featured not one but THREE
gadgets that this guy helped create!
The iPod, the iPhone, and the Nest.
They feature in the Top 50.
Now tell me, if this guy speaks about Building,
shouldn’t we pay heed?
So, I opened the book, and finished the book
just a week ago.
And, he… rides roughshod and spites so many
people!
Everybody!
The teacher who taught him programming!
The first company he worked in!
Steve Jobs himself!
His boss!
Google!
The company that acquired Nest paying billions
of dollars!
Larry Page!
And, he shows much anger at his own younger
self too!
The past!
The young unwise version of himself!
Much vitriol!
I went through the Table of Contents.
It is beautifully structured.
It has five chapters.
Build your Career.
Build your Business.
Build your Product.
Build your Team.
Build Yourself.
From each of these, I am going to pick out
one or two of the unorthodox pieces of advice
he had to give, and I am going to present
them to you.
Let’s start with Build Your Career.
He says, every single person will face this
quandary some time or the other in their career.
That decision to Quit.
How to do it, how to identify the time has
come, etc..
well, that is when you will start looking
at the calendar and looking at the clock.
Oh.. is it already Friday?
Hmm, is it Monday again?
Ouch, is it still just 3 PM in the day?
When you start doing that, something has gone
wrong in the system, and your inner mind is
giving you signals, he says.
He also adds, if you are really going to quit,
if you have made up your mind, quit cleanly,
quit quietly, quit after finishing what you
started.
Finish your meaningful contribution.
If the next employer has respected you and
acknowledged your skills, that respect will
extend beyond tomorrow.
That respect will still be around.
If you are going to quit this job and join
the next one overnight, what will that next
employer think?!
He might also think, oh, is this how you will
leave ME in the lurch too, when the time comes?
Particularly, he says, people will not remember
how you STARTED a job.
They will surely remember how you FINISHED
it.
So, do a good job, before leaving.
Also, slightly controversially for me, he
says, … remember the Starting with Why philosophy?
That personal mission statement?
Analyse it, understand it, deeply, and internalise
it.
And then, as long as the company you are working
in is aligned to YOUR internal mission statement,
continue in that job.
Else, move on!
And, he gives a personal anecdote — Personal
electronic gadgets was MY mission statement,
I changed ten companies!
Failed in many.
Succeeded finally at Nest!
Probably he’s got a point there.
And, finally, do not EVER use quitting as
a negotiating weapon.
I will quit, if you don’t give me that hike.
If you don’t give me onsite opportunities.
If you don’t assign me to that project.
Never do that, he says.
That’s about your career.
Building your Business.
He says, how do you spot a good idea?
Not the one that you keep chasing all the
time.
There will probably be hundred such.
But, the one that keeps chasing YOU all the
time.
Remember the lamb that followed her everywhere
in “Mary had a little lamb”?
Similarly, this idea will keep chasing you.
For this author, the idea of a smart thermostat
chased him for TEN LONG YEARS!
A temperature controller!
Ten years!
The other thing about ideaspotting, he says…
it will keep chasing you like a lover..
But, don’t immediately give in.
Keep them at arm’s length.
He refers to the brilliant idea of Daniel
Kahneman’s.
Thinking Fast, Thinking Slow.
Remember?
There is this phrase called “Delayed Intuition”!
If you take a hasty decision, it is bound
to go wrong.
Just when it seems like you have to make an
emergency decision, that’s when you should
delay it.
Tomorrow.
Next month perhaps.
Check if it burns with the same intensity
still.
That is how you spot a good idea.
And, it should not be just for you.
It should be for you, and as you talk about
it with others, they should go, “Yes, I
also have the same problem, Yes, I also suffer”,
and a crowd of early adopters should come
in tow!
Then, it is a good idea!
Also, he says, too many people make the mistake
of thinking that their idea is a world-class
amazing idea.
But, it is a vitamin.
Not a painkiller.
Painkiller is NEEDED by everybody.
They NEED to buy it.
The vitamin?
You think they should buy it!
There is a big difference between those two!
Be very careful!
Then he moves on to building your product.
You have an idea, but how are you going to
build it?
There is just one shining, unorthodox advice
he gives.
He says, project plans won’t work.
Any new idea that comes along, any new invention
that happens, you will always want to add
that too in the upcoming version.
The concept of Minimum Viable Product is all
just hogwash.
So, do what Jeff Bezos himself does, at Amazon.
Write the Press Release of the product before
you start the product!
Is it January now?
Are you hoping to launch the product before
it is Christmas?
Well, write a Christmas Week Monday Press
Release.
Imagine you are going to make a press announcement
then.
Press Releases aren’t advertisements.
They aren’t brochures.
They will only tell truths.
They won’t market.
Now, this press release document has to be
framed and hung on the wall at your workplace!
As you move closer and closer to that document-version,
be happy!
If some new features gets introduced that’s
not even mentioned in that document, prune
it!
And, when the time comes that you are as close
to that press release version as you can be,
go ahead, launch it, that’s the only way!
That external commitment!
Of having given your word to somebody else,
some stranger!
No need to release the document.
But, the very fact that you have committed
thus to the outside world, that is enough
to keep you on your toes.
And, he has done it, it seems.
That is the way he launched all his products
on time.
Another tidbit about building your product.
He recalls the great Steve Jobs, and how he
launched the iPhone.
And, in fact, how he launched almost every
other Apple product.
People would just pause and stare and gawk
with open-mouthed awe!
The audience..
For, that was the power of the storytelling
ability of Steve Jobs.
Such rapt attention.
Eyes open, forgetting to blink…
How was he able to work such magic?
How much practice did he do?
That was our thought always, about him.
But, you know what?
Tony has worked very closely with Steve Jobs,
for a long time, and we need to pay heed when
he says this.
He says, Steve Jobs didn’t practice coming
on stage and delivering it.
(Though that is what you read..
So many books keep repeating about that obsession
he had for presentation perfection).
No.
You know where he practiced?
Every time he met a friend, he talked with
family, he went and met some team members,
met some competitors, he kept repeating that
story.
How did he make us believe it, you wonder?
Well, he believed in it completely, for starters!
Only because he was completely trustful of
the story, he didn’t have to spin a yarn.
He just had to speak it as it was.
And, you started to believe it.
He was telling his version of the truth.
He was not spinning a lie.
And, thus, similarly, do you have a true story
about your product that you completely believe
in?
Get that story.
That’s the one we want as consumers!
Beautiful, isn’t it?
Then, he comes to building your team.
How are you going to put together?
He has some bits of advice.
Unorthodox!
Firstly, he says, look for creating multigenerational
teams.
Everybody shouldn’t be post-millennials.
Nor grumpy old people either!
No.
Have young people, old people, men, women,
people who have seen the World Trade Center
fall down, people who have not even started
using Facebook, that is the diversity you
should aim for.
That is when ideas will truly flourish, he
says.
I completely agree.
Multigenerational is the way to go.
The other thing he says about creating a team,
is about interviews.
Typically, interviews are conducted by the
HR representative, and by the person this
new candidate is going to report to.
Very rarely, the team that’s going to work
with that guy, … for example, if he is coming
in as a developer, then the others in the
team may do a peer review of sorts.
And, it usually stops there.
We miss out on one important component.
Who are the internal customers for this person
who is coming in?
There might be a designer.
And, that designer lady may be regularly taking
inputs from this developer and might be giving
stuff back to this developer.
Make that designer lady to interview this
candidate!
There may be a marketing person, who may have
to take inputs from this guy.
So, who are the internal customers?
Find that out, and make them interview the
incoming candidates.
A bit time-consuming, yes, but I think it
will really reap dividends.
Finally, building yourself.
In fact, building yourself is the first chapter
in the book, but I kind of upset the order
because this looked better for me.
Building yourself.
He tells us about a Steve Jobs anecdote.
Steve used to hate management consultants.
From big brand name companies.
He used to go livid, when he chanced upon
them, it seems.
Why?
His analogy was a framed picture of a banana.
They don’t have any experience having worked
WITH bananas.
But, they have pictures of bananas.
Here is a banana.
That’s a grape.
This is a pine-apple.
They haven’t tasted any of those.
So, their knowledge about it is theoretical.
Not practical.
And hence, unless you stand knee deep in that
sludge, unless you shovel that out, you will
never know what the nuances are.
Until then, you are just having a gallery
of banana pictures.
And, finally, he refers to this book.
Called the Defining Decade.
This is about the teenage decade.
Fifteen to twenty-five.
Many make the mistake of thinking this is
one happy carefree lull of an extended vacation.
But, it is supposed to be the defining decade
for you.
And, he gives us three words to take home.
Do.
Fail.
Learn.
That is the cycle.
Don’t wait to Learn.
Do.
Having Done without Learning, you will likely
Fail.
Having Failed, observe and Learn.
Having Learned now, Do better!
That is the cycle!
The number of times you successfully complete
this cycle in this defining decade, that will
define how well you succeed in your career!
As a closing thought, I would like to go to
the book’s closing thought!
He brings it to a beautiful conclusion, actually.
He says, “At the end of the day, there are
two things that matter.
Only two things.
Products and People.
Basically, the stuff that you build, and the
people you build that stuff with.
So, the ideas you chase, and the ideas that
chase you (Mary’s little lamb!) will define
your career.
And, the people you chase them with, may define
your life!”
How beautiful!
We will meet again next week, thank you!